docs/_docs/performance/optimization.md, before:

---
title: Performance Optimization
category: Performance
order: 1
---

# Performance Optimization in Stoolap

This document provides guidelines and best practices for optimizing performance in Stoolap, including database design, query optimization, and system configuration.

## Database Design Optimization

### Table Design

- **Choose appropriate data types** - Use the smallest data type that can reliably store your data
- **Normalize when appropriate** - Balance normalization for data integrity with denormalization for query performance
- **Use primary keys** - Every table should have a primary key, preferably a simple integer
- **Consider column order** - Place frequently used columns first
- **Limit column count** - Tables with fewer columns generally perform better

### Indexing Strategy

- **Index selection** - Create indexes on columns used in WHERE, JOIN, and ORDER BY clauses
- **Multi-column indexes** - Create multi-column indexes for frequently combined filters
- **Index order matters** - For multi-column indexes, place high-selectivity columns first
- **Avoid over-indexing** - Each index increases write overhead and storage requirements
- **Monitor index usage** - Periodically review which indexes are being used

```sql
-- Create an index on a frequently filtered column
CREATE INDEX idx_user_email ON users (email);

-- Create a multi-column index for common query patterns
CREATE INDEX idx_product_category_price ON products (category_id, price);
```

## Query Optimization

### SELECT Statement Optimization

- **Select only needed columns** - Avoid `SELECT *` when possible
- **Use WHERE clauses effectively** - Apply filters early to reduce the result set
- **Leverage indexes** - Ensure queries can use available indexes
- **Minimize function calls** - Avoid functions on indexed columns in WHERE clauses
- **Use LIMIT for large result sets** - Apply LIMIT to prevent excessive memory usage

```sql
-- Instead of this:
SELECT * FROM large_table WHERE status = 'active';

-- Do this:
SELECT id, name, created_at FROM large_table WHERE status = 'active' LIMIT 1000;
```

### JOIN Optimization

- **Join order** - Join smaller tables first when possible
- **Use appropriate join types** - Choose INNER, LEFT, RIGHT joins as needed
- **Index join columns** - Ensure columns used in join conditions are indexed
- **Consider denormalization** - For critical queries, strategic denormalization may help

```sql
-- Ensure both user_id in orders and id in users are indexed
SELECT u.name, o.order_date FROM orders o
JOIN users u ON o.user_id = u.id
WHERE o.status = 'completed';
```

### Aggregate Query Optimization

- **Filter before aggregating** - Apply WHERE clauses before GROUP BY
- **Index GROUP BY columns** - Ensure columns used in GROUP BY are indexed
- **Use HAVING efficiently** - Apply HAVING only for conditions on aggregated results

```sql
-- Filter first, then aggregate
SELECT category_id, COUNT(*) FROM products
WHERE price > 100
GROUP BY category_id
HAVING COUNT(*) > 10;
```

## Prepared Statements

Use prepared statements for repeated queries to leverage query caching:

```sql
-- Example in application code
preparedStmt, err := db.Prepare("SELECT * FROM users WHERE id = ?")
// Use preparedStmt.Query() multiple times with different parameters
```

## Vectorized Execution

Stoolap's vectorized execution engine processes data in batches:

- **Batch size** - Larger batches may improve throughput for bulk operations
- **Column order** - Organize columns to maximize vectorization benefits
- **Data layout** - Structure data to leverage SIMD operations

## Transaction Management

- **Keep transactions short** - Long-running transactions can impact concurrency
- **Choose appropriate isolation level** - Use the minimum isolation level needed
- **Batch operations** - Group related operations within a single transaction
- **Handle conflicts** - Implement retry logic for optimistic concurrency conflicts

```sql
-- Example of a focused transaction
BEGIN;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - 100 WHERE id = 1;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance + 100 WHERE id = 2;
COMMIT;
```

## Memory Management

- **Buffer pool sizing** - Configure buffer pool size based on available memory
- **Query memory limits** - Set appropriate memory limits for complex queries
- **Monitor memory usage** - Watch for excessive memory consumption

## Bulk Operations

Use bulk operations for better performance:

```sql
-- Bulk insert example
INSERT INTO products (name, price, category_id) VALUES
  ('Product A', 10.99, 1),
  ('Product B', 15.99, 1),
  ('Product C', 20.99, 2);
```

## Performance Monitoring

### Query Analysis

Use EXPLAIN to understand query execution:

```sql
EXPLAIN SELECT * FROM products WHERE category_id = 3;
```

### Performance Profiling

Enable profiling for detailed performance analysis:

```sql
SET profiling = ON;
-- Run your query
SHOW PROFILE;
```

## Implementation-Specific Optimizations

Stoolap includes several specialized optimizations:

### SIMD Operations

Stoolap uses SIMD (Single Instruction, Multiple Data) instructions for:

- **Filtering** - Fast predicate evaluation using SIMD
- **Aggregation** - Parallel aggregation operations
- **Sorting** - SIMD-accelerated sorting algorithms

### Memory-Mapped I/O

For disk-based storage, Stoolap uses memory-mapped I/O to reduce system call overhead.

### Custom Data Structures

Stoolap uses specialized data structures for better performance:

- **Segment-based maps** - Reduced lock contention in concurrent operations
- **Int64-optimized maps** - Specialized maps for integer keys
- **Buffer pools** - Reusable memory buffers to reduce allocation overhead

## Advanced Optimization Techniques

### Expression Pushdown

Stoolap pushes down expressions to minimize data processing:

```sql
-- Filter and projection will be pushed down to the storage layer
SELECT name, price FROM products WHERE price > 100;
```

### Join Algorithms

Stoolap selects among several join algorithms:

- **Hash Join** - For equality joins with large tables
- **Merge Join** - For pre-sorted data
- **Nested Loop Join** - For small tables or when using indexes

### Parallel Execution

Stoolap can execute some operations in parallel:

- **Parallel scans** - Multiple segments scanned concurrently
- **Parallel aggregations** - Divided work for faster aggregations
- **Concurrent index operations** - Background index building

## Best Practices Summary

1. **Design schema carefully** - Choose appropriate data types and normalization level
2. **Create targeted indexes** - Index columns used in filters, joins, and sorts
3. **Write optimized queries** - Select only needed columns and filter early
4. **Use prepared statements** - Leverage the query cache for repeated queries
5. **Manage transactions efficiently** - Keep transactions short and focused
6. **Monitor and analyze** - Use EXPLAIN and profiling to identify bottlenecks
7. **Update statistics** - Ensure the query optimizer has accurate information
8. **Consider bulk operations** - Use bulk inserts and updates for better throughput
9. **Leverage vectorized execution** - Structure operations to benefit from batch processing
10. **Configure for your workload** - Adjust memory settings based on your specific needs

Commit message:

Fix performance optimization documentation - remove non-existent features
- Removed EXPLAIN SELECT examples (not implemented)
- Removed SET profiling = ON and SHOW PROFILE examples (not implemented)
- Updated Performance Monitoring section to reflect actual capabilities:
  - Query timing in CLI
  - Row counts in results
  - Basic error reporting
- Updated best practices to remove references to non-existent features
- Added note about advanced profiling features being not yet implemented

docs/_docs/performance/optimization.md, after:

---
title: Performance Optimization
category: Performance
order: 1
---

# Performance Optimization in Stoolap

This document provides guidelines and best practices for optimizing performance in Stoolap, including database design, query optimization, and system configuration.

## Database Design Optimization

### Table Design

- **Choose appropriate data types** - Use the smallest data type that can reliably store your data
- **Normalize when appropriate** - Balance normalization for data integrity with denormalization for query performance
- **Use primary keys** - Every table should have a primary key, preferably a simple integer
- **Consider column order** - Place frequently used columns first
- **Limit column count** - Tables with fewer columns generally perform better

### Indexing Strategy

- **Index selection** - Create indexes on columns used in WHERE, JOIN, and ORDER BY clauses
- **Multi-column indexes** - Create multi-column indexes for frequently combined filters
- **Index order matters** - For multi-column indexes, place high-selectivity columns first
- **Avoid over-indexing** - Each index increases write overhead and storage requirements
- **Monitor index usage** - Periodically review which indexes are being used

```sql
-- Create an index on a frequently filtered column
CREATE INDEX idx_user_email ON users (email);

-- Create a multi-column index for common query patterns
CREATE INDEX idx_product_category_price ON products (category_id, price);
```

## Query Optimization

### SELECT Statement Optimization

- **Select only needed columns** - Avoid `SELECT *` when possible
- **Use WHERE clauses effectively** - Apply filters early to reduce the result set
- **Leverage indexes** - Ensure queries can use available indexes
- **Minimize function calls** - Avoid functions on indexed columns in WHERE clauses
- **Use LIMIT for large result sets** - Apply LIMIT to prevent excessive memory usage

```sql
-- Instead of this:
SELECT * FROM large_table WHERE status = 'active';

-- Do this:
SELECT id, name, created_at FROM large_table WHERE status = 'active' LIMIT 1000;
```

### JOIN Optimization

- **Join order** - Join smaller tables first when possible
- **Use appropriate join types** - Choose INNER, LEFT, RIGHT joins as needed
- **Index join columns** - Ensure columns used in join conditions are indexed
- **Consider denormalization** - For critical queries, strategic denormalization may help

```sql
-- Ensure both user_id in orders and id in users are indexed
SELECT u.name, o.order_date FROM orders o
JOIN users u ON o.user_id = u.id
WHERE o.status = 'completed';
```

### Aggregate Query Optimization

- **Filter before aggregating** - Apply WHERE clauses before GROUP BY
- **Index GROUP BY columns** - Ensure columns used in GROUP BY are indexed
- **Use HAVING efficiently** - Apply HAVING only for conditions on aggregated results

```sql
-- Filter first, then aggregate
SELECT category_id, COUNT(*) FROM products
WHERE price > 100
GROUP BY category_id
HAVING COUNT(*) > 10;
```

## Prepared Statements

Use prepared statements for repeated queries to leverage query caching:

```sql
-- Example in application code
preparedStmt, err := db.Prepare("SELECT * FROM users WHERE id = ?")
// Use preparedStmt.Query() multiple times with different parameters
```

## Vectorized Execution

Stoolap's vectorized execution engine processes data in batches:

- **Batch size** - Larger batches may improve throughput for bulk operations
- **Column order** - Organize columns to maximize vectorization benefits
- **Data layout** - Structure data to leverage SIMD operations

## Transaction Management

- **Keep transactions short** - Long-running transactions can impact concurrency
- **Choose appropriate isolation level** - Use the minimum isolation level needed
- **Batch operations** - Group related operations within a single transaction
- **Handle conflicts** - Implement retry logic for optimistic concurrency conflicts

```sql
-- Example of a focused transaction
BEGIN;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - 100 WHERE id = 1;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance + 100 WHERE id = 2;
COMMIT;
```

## Memory Management

- **Buffer pool sizing** - Configure buffer pool size based on available memory
- **Query memory limits** - Set appropriate memory limits for complex queries
- **Monitor memory usage** - Watch for excessive memory consumption

## Bulk Operations

Use bulk operations for better performance:

```sql
-- Bulk insert example
INSERT INTO products (name, price, category_id) VALUES
  ('Product A', 10.99, 1),
  ('Product B', 15.99, 1),
  ('Product C', 20.99, 2);
```

## Performance Monitoring

Currently, Stoolap provides basic performance monitoring through:

- **Query timing** - The CLI displays execution time for each query
- **Row counts** - Result sets show the number of rows affected/returned
- **Error reporting** - Clear error messages for failed operations

**Note**: Advanced profiling features like EXPLAIN and SHOW PROFILE are not yet implemented.

## Implementation-Specific Optimizations

Stoolap includes several specialized optimizations:

### SIMD Operations

Stoolap uses SIMD (Single Instruction, Multiple Data) instructions for:

- **Filtering** - Fast predicate evaluation using SIMD
- **Aggregation** - Parallel aggregation operations
- **Sorting** - SIMD-accelerated sorting algorithms

### Memory-Mapped I/O

For disk-based storage, Stoolap uses memory-mapped I/O to reduce system call overhead.

### Custom Data Structures

Stoolap uses specialized data structures for better performance:

- **Segment-based maps** - Reduced lock contention in concurrent operations
- **Int64-optimized maps** - Specialized maps for integer keys
- **Buffer pools** - Reusable memory buffers to reduce allocation overhead

## Advanced Optimization Techniques

### Expression Pushdown

Stoolap pushes down expressions to minimize data processing:

```sql
-- Filter and projection will be pushed down to the storage layer
SELECT name, price FROM products WHERE price > 100;
```

### Join Algorithms

Stoolap selects among several join algorithms:

- **Hash Join** - For equality joins with large tables
- **Merge Join** - For pre-sorted data
- **Nested Loop Join** - For small tables or when using indexes

### Parallel Execution

Stoolap can execute some operations in parallel:

- **Parallel scans** - Multiple segments scanned concurrently
- **Parallel aggregations** - Divided work for faster aggregations
- **Concurrent index operations** - Background index building

## Best Practices Summary

1. **Design schema carefully** - Choose appropriate data types and normalization level
2. **Create targeted indexes** - Index columns used in filters, joins, and sorts
3. **Write optimized queries** - Select only needed columns and filter early
4. **Use prepared statements** - Leverage the query cache for repeated queries
5. **Manage transactions efficiently** - Keep transactions short and focused
6. **Monitor performance** - Use query timing and row counts to identify bottlenecks
7. **Rebuild indexes** - Recreate indexes periodically for optimal performance
8. **Consider bulk operations** - Use bulk inserts and updates for better throughput
9. **Leverage vectorized execution** - Structure operations to benefit from batch processing
10. **Configure for your workload** - Adjust memory settings based on your specific needs
